The ABIapp (Applying taxonomic Boundaries for species Identification) application was developed for users who require assistance in species delimitation of parasitic helminths. The application was developed from the GenBank sequence database of all current parasitic helminths to determine the cut-off genetic distance values at each taxonomic level (from species to order) using a machine learning algorithm (1). The ABIapp is easy to use, as users can input an aligned FASTA file of the helminth taxa of interest, or a pairwise genetic distance value obtained comparison between two sequences. The application allows users to choose from the ten molecular genetic markers (18S rRNA, 28S rRNA, ITS1, ITS2, COI, COII, cytB, ND1, 12S rRNA, and 16S rRNA) that are often used to classify parasitic helminths. Based on the input (FASTA file or genetic distance value), the ABIapp will display the specimen’s taxonomic status and a simple phylogeny (based on p-distance) from the user’s input data. Moreover, the ABIapp can recommend alternative genetic markers in cases where the initial molecular genetic marker used is not suitable.

Defining species boundaries for helminths has confounded researchers for decades. The vast diversity of helminth species, along with the presence of species complexes and cryptic species contributes to challenges in species delimitation for helminths (2). With species as the basic unit in taxonomy, species boundaries are thus important for accurate species identification, disease diagnosis, and its role in the ecosystem (3, 4). Genetic distances, through the difference in sequence variation between two sequences, are the simplest way to gauge if species are conspecific. A general value of 10% genetic variation using mitochondrial genetic markers between two sequences is deemed as belonging to different species (5). Researchers usually rely on previous genetic distance of organisms of related taxa that have been studied to estimate whether their target taxa of interest are conspecific or not. However, estimates to determine what constitutes ‘sufficient’ sequence variation varies among taxa and across taxonomic levels, and there is currently no estimate of sequence variation across taxonomic boundaries for helminths of medical importance to humans and animals.

To circumvent these gaps, the purpose of this application is to aid in helminth species delimitation through the cut-off genetic distance values that were estimated using the unsupervised machine learning K-means clustering algorithm. The ABIapp serves as a convenient tool for species delimitation across the taxonomic hierarchy levels for nematodes, trematodes, and cestodes.